= Test instruments and environments =

== Compiler/VM/bytecode ==
=== VM test environment ===

It is possible to run/debug Phantom VM in user mode ('''pvm_test'''), see [[PhantomTestEnvironment]].

=== VM/compiler unit tests ===

There's a special class ru.dz.phantom.system.regression_tests.ph (plib/sys/src/ru.dz) which contains tests for both compiler (.ph frontend and codegen) and virtual machine. These tests are automatically run on every clean start of kernel.

Result can be seen in kernel log ('''run/serial0.log''', QEMU serial port log file)

```
Phantom language regression tests are running
Checking flow control operators... passed
Checking int math... passed
Checking arrays... Beeping: beep two! beep one! beep zero! passed
Checking .internal.directory class operations... new passed
Finished compiler regression tests
```

See also [[Running]]

=== Phantom language compiler regress tests ===

'''test/plc''' directory contains regress tests for plc compiler. There are correct copies of compiler listing files. Tests run compiler on .ph source files and compare listing outputs with stored ones.

=== Java compiler unit tests ===

Currently are in '''tools/plc/src/test/toPhantom''', but shall come to '''plib/java/src/test/toPhantom''' eventually. Shall be run as above.

== Kernel unit tests ==

There are two ways to run kernel code unit tests. 

=== Kernel mode ===

There is an unit-test environment right in kernel, it will be run if kernel is started with '''-test all''' command line parameter, as in '''kernel=(hd0,0)/boot/phantom -d=20 -- -test all''' grub boot command.

=== Hosted mode ===

Some of unit tests can be compiled and run as an user mode application. See /test/unut directory and makefile in /test.

== External tests ==

Directory '''test/external''' contains tool to be run from outside of kernel and communicate with kernel with TCP/UDP.

== Phantom Debugger ==

(Unfinished) debugger lives in '''tools/pdb'''. Again, connects to Phantom VM test env (see pvm_test above). It must connect to real kernel also, TBD.


